Two Supervised Learning Approaches for Name Disambiguation in Author Citations
Hui Han
Department of Computer Science and Engineering The Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA, 16802

Lee Giles
School of Information Sciences and Technology The Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA, 16802

Hongyuan Zha
Department of Computer Science and Engineering The Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA, 16802

hhan@cse.psu.edu Cheng Li

giles@ist.psu.edu

zha@cse.psu.edu

Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis
NEC Laboratories America, Inc. 4 Independence Way, Princeton, NJ 08540

Department of Biostatistics Harvard School of Public Health Boston, MA, 02115

cli@hsph.harvard.edu

kt@nec-labs.com

ABSTRACT
Due to name abbreviations, identical names, name misspellings, and pseudonyms in publications or bibliographies (citations), an author may have multiple names and multiple authors may share the same name. Such name ambiguity affects the performance of document retrieval, web search, database integration, and may cause improper attribution to authors. This paper investigates two supervised learning approaches to disambiguate authors in the citations 1 . One approach uses the naive Bayes probability model, a generative model; the other uses Support Vector Machines(SVMs) [39] and the vector space representation of citations, a discriminative model. Both approaches utilize three types of citation attributes: co-author names, the title of the paper , and the title of the journal or proceeding. We illustrate these two approaches on two types of data, one collected from the web, mainly publication lists from homepages, the other collected from the DBLP citation databases.

Keywords
Naive Bayes, Name Disambiguation, Support Vector Machine

1. INTRODUCTION
Due to name variation, identical names, name misspellings, and pseudonyms, we observe two types of name ambiguities in research papers or bibliographies (citations). The ﬁrst type is that an author has multiple name labels. For example, the author “David S. Johnson” may appear in multiple publications under different name abbreviations such as “David Johnson”, “D. Johnson”, or “D. S. Johnson”, or a misspelled name such as “Davad Johnson”. The second type is that multiple authors may share the same name label. For example, “D. Johnson” may refer to “David B. Johnson” from Rice University, “David S. Johnson” from AT&T research lab, or “David E. Johnson” from Utah University (assuming the authors still have these afﬁliations). Name ambiguity can affect the quality of scientiﬁc data gathering, can decrease the performance of information retrieval and web search, and can cause the incorrect identiﬁcation of and credit attribution to authors. For example, identical names cause the ambiguity of the “author page” in the web DBLP (Digital Bibliography & Library Project) 2 . The author page of “Yu Chen” in the DBLP contains citations from three different people with the same name: Yu Chen from University of California, Los Angeles; Yu Chen from Microsoft Beijing; Yu Chen as the senior professor from Renmin University of China. Such name ambiguity causes the incorrect identiﬁcation of authors. For example, the author page of “Jia Li” in the DBLP refers to the “Jia Li” from the Department of Statistics at the Pennsylvania State University. However, the “Home Page” link in her author page directs to the professor with the identical name in the Department of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. We observe from CiteSeer [18] the incorrect attribution to the authors due to similar ambiguity. “D. Johnson” is the most cited author in Computer Science accord2

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Systems]: Information Search and Retrieval

General Terms
Algorithms
1 “Citations” refer to an author’s publication list in the citation format.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. JCDL’04, June 7–11, 2004, Tucson, Arizona, USA. Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-832-6/04/0006 ...$5.00.

http://WWW.Informatik.Uni-Trier.DE/∼ley/db/index.html

296

